JUDY WOODRUFF: After years
of recession, skyrocketing
inflation, and hardship,
the oil-rich country
of Venezuela is spiraling into
social and economic collapse.
Many of its people have been
taking to the streets on an
almost daily basis for the last
two months to demand
that President Nicolas
Maduro step down.
With the support of the Pulitzer
Center for Crisis Reporting,
special correspondent Nadja
Drost and videographer Bruno
Federico went to Caracas to find
out how the wave of uprisings
is creating a political crisis.
NADJA DROST: Venezuela
today, an economy in
freefall, triple-digit
inflation, dire shortages
of nearly everything,
from food to medicine.
The social and economic crisis
that started intensifying
after President Nicolas Maduro
took over from his
iconic predecessor Hugo
Chavez is tailspinning
into a political one,
as anti-government protests
rock the capital, Caracas.
Chavismo, the populist form of
socialism branded by Chavez that
provided services for the poor
paid for by profits from the
world's largest oil reserves,
is teetering on the verge of
collapse.
Behind us is a sea of angry
Venezuelans who have been taking
to the streets since early
April, protesting the government
and its handling of this
country's deepening crisis.
But now that President
Maduro is pushing ahead
with his controversial
plan to convene a citizens
assembly and write up
a new constitution,
opposition protesters say
that a new constitution
will consolidate government
power and severely shrink
the political space
for the opposition.
MAN (through translator): We
need a solution to problems
that Venezuelans confront every
day, like shortages, insecurity.
NADJA DROST: The streets
have turned violent.
Since early April, over
60 people have been killed
and 1,000 injured as a
result of protest-related
violence.
Most protesters march
peacefully, but a violent
minority has prompted
the government to call
them terrorists.
An intensifying crackdown has
led to more than 2,500 arrests.
Many of them are represented by
attorney Jorge Ramos, who runs
a legal assistance group called
the Venezuelan Penal Forum.
Ramos says there's a benefit for
the government to detain people.
JORGE RAMOS, Venezuelan Penal
Forum: And the benefit is
intimidating this specific group
of society.
Why?
Not to demonstrate, not to say
things against the government.
NADJA DROST: But even
intimidation tactics
can't seem to quell the
discontent of so many
Venezuelans, as the
crisis bleeds into
every aspect of life.
Lisbeth Vieras has worked for
nine years as a taxi driver
shuttling passengers to and
from the Caracas Airport
to support herself, her
son and daughter Glorybeth.
She was never a fan of Chavez
nor Maduro, but now that
tourism and business travel has
plummeted, she blames the
government for sending
the economy down the tube.
LISBETH VIERAS, Venezuela
(through translator): There
are a lots of changes.
Two years ago, we could
make three to four daily
runs, today, only one.
NADJA DROST: Now, Vieras can
barely cover the cost of food
and her daughter's law studies
at university.
But her daughter's still
studying, luckier than others.
GLORYBETH PARRA VIERAS,
Venezuela (through
translator): I have
peers who can't pay their
tuition.
It's more important to eat in
this situation than to study.
NADJA DROST: As Venezuela's
crisis deepens, the chorus of
voices calling for change grows.
Michael Penfold, a university
professor in Caracas and a
fellow at the Woodrow Wilson
Center, says that Chavismo
is failing to understand
that political and
economic conditions have
changed.
MICHAEL PENFOLD, Woodrow Wilson
Center: But the problem is
that this revolution, which
right now holds a minority, is
trying to run the country as
if they still held a majority
and as if they still had
this hegemonic sort of
impulse of controlling
society and controlling
institutions.
NADJA DROST: Opponents
have protested delayed
regional elections and
the attempt to strip
authority from the
opposition-held Congress.
But Maduro's decree to create
a constituent assembly to draft
a new constitution, a move
they fear will favor only his
priorities, was the last straw.
This resident of a Caracas
barrio says it is yet another
political distraction.
WOMAN (through translator):
You see a lot of problems
here, and we know that this man
is inventing fictions.
Instead of looking for
solutions, he's looking to
entrench himself in power.
We don't want this.
What we want are solutions.
In my family, five people
have left the country.
Fleeing what?
There's crime.
You don't know when you leave
when you will come back.
I spent 18 hours to buy four
pounds of corn flour, 18 hours.
That's not human.
NADJA DROST: It isn't, but she
has a roof over head, which
is more than this group of
people who find themselves
living on the streets,
scavenging for food
amidst the garbage.
It is a desperate, but
organized activity.
They know the schedule
of the garbage truck,
and wait at restaurants
exactly when the garbage
is taken out, carry the
bags over to the riverside,
and comb through it.
Pedro, who didn't want
to be identified by his
full name, used to work
as a graphic designer,
but can't find work.
PEDRO, Venezuela (through
translator): I found
myself short of money
when I was renting a
room, and the solution
was the streets.
NADJA DROST: He says more and
more people join them every day.
PEDRO (through translator):
Everyone who comes here
arrives skinny, and
gains weight because,
in reality, we eat.
People may say that we
eat garbage, but now
many of them envy us
because we have something
in our stomachs.
NADJA DROST: As more and more
Venezuelans find themselves
in dire situations, more are
pulled towards political groups
in the opposition coalition,
in search of a response to the
crisis, like the
Voluntad Popular Party.
At its helm is Freddy Guevara,
one of several young opposition
members of Congress who are
playing a key role in organizing
the anti-government marches.
FREDDY GUEVARA, Voluntad Popular
Party (through translator): We
have reached the point where
all constitutional doors
have been closed on us.
That's pushed everyone to
head out into the streets.
NADJA DROST: For Guevara and
other hard-line government
opponents, it all comes down to
one central demand:
that Maduro leave.
FREDDY GUEVARA (through
translator): There is no way to
solve all these problems with
Maduro at the head.
NADJA DROST: At home
in a high-rise complex
of free housing built
under Chavez, Darwuin
Hernandez fears a new government
would turn their back on
the interests of the poor in
particular.
DARWUIN HERNANDEZ, Venezuela
(through translator):
What has the revolution
and socialism given
me?
Well, this humble home where
I am, thanks to God first
and to Chavez, and to Maduro.
It's what I always wanted,
a decent home, nothing else.
NADJA DROST: Professor
Penfold says the opposition
shouldn't underestimate
the power of Chavismo.
MICHAEL PENFOLD: I don't think
that you can move out of this
situation without an important
fracture happening within
the government coalition.
NADJA DROST: Guevara and the
opposition are counting on
government dissidents to help
bring down Maduro.
FREDDY GUEVARA (through
translator): That is to say
that, every day, there are more
players inside the regime
that move away from Maduro.
This way, he won't have the
power to impose his will.
NADJA DROST: But until and
if that happens, Venezuela is
stuck in political deadlock.
MICHAEL PENFOLD: It's also a
country -- and I have to say
this -- with horror, that cannot
stay in the situation
it is for a longer time.
NADJA DROST: Taxi driver Vieras
can hardly cope with worries
over the chaos and insecurity,
and her kids.
LISBETH VIERAS (through
translator): She, for example,
she escapes and goes off to the
marches.
She says, "Mama, if I tell
you I'm going to the protest,
you won't let me go."
NADJA DROST: Vieras knows that
when her daughter runs off to
marches, she always takes her
cap.
It's become her way
of checking in on her
daughter's whereabouts.
LISBETH VIERAS (through
translator): I call her brother
and I say, go to her room and
see if her hat is there.
GLORYBETH PARRA VIERAS (through
translator): I understand
her as a mother how it would
be to receive a call that
your daughter is dead or
your daughter was attacked.
But, even so, sometimes,
I go to the protests.
NADJA DROST: In fact, she goes
several times a week, helping
her university peers who are
often injured on the front line.
WOMAN (through translator):
Here, he who tires, loses.
And we're going to keep
going until we're able
to get out of this.
NADJA DROST: For the
"PBS NewsHour," reporting
with Bruno Federico, I'm
Nadja Drost in Caracas.